The theme of this year's gray area
festival to the max invites us to think
about corporeal practice and perfection
in contemporary technoculture. And I
want to take this opportunity to reflect
on the body under digital conditions.
And I feel like both of the previous
talks have been kind of setting me up
for some of the things I'm going to be
talking about. Um, I'm going to think
about how perfection or the striving for
perfection always returns us to the
limits of embodiment to glitches,
breakdowns, and detours.
Uh my work as a media theorist and as a
collaborator in artistic projects has
tried to think through precisely this
tension between computational media's
drive toward smoothness, optimization,
and perfection and the embodied
realities that never quite align. In my
book, Post Cinematic Bodies, I explore
how contemporary media environments
format perception and experience at
levels below conscious awareness.
In a more recent essay, from sublime awe
to abject cringe, I foreground the
bodily affects that arise in our
encounters with AI generated imagery.
And in current work, I find myself
turning to Jean Paul Sartra's idea of
hodlogical space, a world of obstacles,
detours, and affordances to think about
how technics reshape the very horizon of
possible experience. And here maybe I'm
thinking also about that unsayable it
that is underlying all possible uh
phenomena that Stephanie was talking
about.
What I want to do today is bring these
strands together and to connect them to
the work that I'm doing with the
non-fenomenal collective composed of
Brett Amory Karen Densen and myself and
they're both over there. Um, in
particular, the curatorial and
installation work that we're doing is
aimed at bridging theory and practice,
making palpable the intersections of
code, computational, architectural, and
social, that shape embodied experience
today. The spaces we build are designed
to re to retrain bodies, recalibrate
movements, and disrupt habitual
orientations to the world with
algorithmic processes suffusing the
material space. These installations
offer a necessarily indirect and
aesthetic grasp of the invisible
conditions of contemporary appearance
and disappearance.
So in post- cinematic bodies and just as
a little bit of of theoretical
background I argue that computational
media exert their force on bodies
through a double movement. On the one
hand they are disorrelative. The speeds
and scales of algorithmic processing
exceed the perceptual bond between
subject and object. Computation
therefore intervenes directly in the
pre-personal flesh or it has the uh the
capacity to do so operating beneath
perception. On the other hand, these
media are radically correlative.
Algorithms operate by establishing
statistical correlations that reproduce
and implant normative constructs of
gender, race, ability, and disability
directly in our embodied relations to
the world. This double movement is what
enables a correlative capture of the
body and its metabolism, norming
subjectivity and collectivity prior to
conscious awareness. But because these
interventions take place in the
disorrelated matter of pre-personal
embodiment, that that level of
embodiment that does not rise to
consciousness, a margin of indeterminacy
remains, a space where aesthetic and
political resistance might still be
mounted.
This might sound abstract, but you know
what I'm talking about experientially.
Think of scrolling late at night when
predictive feeds keep you moving longer
than you intended. Or think of how
autocorrect completes your sentences
before you've thought them through.
These aren't just annoyances. They're
examples of the way computation
pre-shapes your field of possible
action, your world. And here Sartra is
strangely useful. He describes
space as a non- uklitian field of
obstacles, affordances, and indirect
paths. Hological coming from the Greek
hodos for path. To cross a street, I
don't trace a straight line. I wait for
the light, dodge a cyclist or a Whimo,
follow the crosswalk. The world is not
given as pure geometry, but as lived
space, as a lived space of paths and
detours.
Technoculture intensifies this.
Algorithmic infrastruct infrastructures
shape hological space in advance,
nudging us along certain routes, slowing
us down, blocking access or amplifying
our gestures. The body becomes less a
stable entity than a variable
reconfigurable node in a field of codes.
If this is true at the level of
infrastructure, it's equally true at the
level of aesthetics. AI art offers a
particularly vivid example. When Open AI
released Dolly 2, they chose to showcase
it with a now famous image of an
astronaut riding a horse in space. The
image was meant to provoke sublime awe,
a gasp at the impossible made visible.
But anyone who's spent time with
generative models, which in some way is
all of us knows the other side. Too many
fingers, distorted faces, impossible
teeth, failures that provoke not awe but
cringe. Our bodies recoil sometimes
before our minds do. Our mirror neurons
say no compute. These visceral reactions
matter. They're not trivial. They're the
body metabolizing the clash between
algorithmic logics and human sensory
motor schemas or between the time and
space of of embodied motion and action
and that of algorithmic processing.
Cringe is a corporeal practice, a way of
sensing the invisible infrastructures of
computation through bodily dissonance.
So I argue that we need to expand AI
discourse beyond questions of
intelligence or ethics in the abstract.
We need an AI aesthetics that takes
seriously the embodied affects of
encountering machine learning systems.
Awe and cringe are not just emotions.
They're indicators of how our bodies are
being reorganized in relation to
computation.
So this brings me to nonphenomenal
phenomenalities, a show that I curated
along with Brett Amory and Karen Densen
at 120710 gallery in Berkeley this
summer and with another iteration coming
to Stanford Art Gallery this winter.
This was a group show featuring 15
artists or collaboratives, but hung as
or inside an overarching installation
piece. It's often unclear where works
begin and where they end. And this is by
design as we aim to disrupt habits of
perception that are shaped by
computational, material, and social
codes, including those of the art world
and commercial technologies.
The show is concerned with the changing
conditions of the phenomenal of
appearance and disappearance as informed
by AI and other technologies. But this
is not a tech show. And it was important
to us that no screens are visible upon
entering the gallery. They're present,
but you have to go around behind or
inside the installation to find them. We
think of these installation practices as
hodological laboratories,
environments that retrain bodies,
redirect orientations and expose the
codes that shape experience today. So
let me start with two works that
foreground algorithmic substrates. The
first is glitches are like wild animals
in latent space, my ongoing
collaboration with Karen Densen. The
project begins with Karen's glitch
paintings, which are themselves based on
databent wildlife footage. When we
trained a diffusion model on these
paintings, it predictably tried to erase
the glitches, smoothing them into
normative stereotyped images. These are
denoising machines, so they want to help
us clean that up, right? Anyway,
prompting the model with our
deliberately impossible abstract phrase,
"Glitches are like wild animals in
latent space," the model gave us lions,
tigers, and zebras, apparently the only
wild animals that the machine with its
algorithmic biases could imagine. We
kept pushing back until it finally
produced a strange cow or cow-like
figure which Karen painted and which
serves as the seed for some animations
made with the same model. We in we
reintroduced that seed back into the
loop and then glitch the outputs again
and again. Custom software operates
combinatorially in the manner of a
cutup, algorithmically compositing five
strips of glitchy video alongside text
generated by a Markoff model trained on
my book, Discorrelated Images. And I'll
just show you a little bit of what that
looks and sounds like.
Oh,
heat,
heat.
This is our first look at the
phenomenology. ology of disembodied
artificial perception. The generativity
of compressed video involves not only
the generation of the future,
not only the generation of the future.
Um, so anyway, uh, the that's that's
part of it, but the audiovisisual
installation is behind a set of
paintings that are encountered first.
This pentaptic that you see that viewers
see when they enter the gallery
registers the spatial composition of the
bovine seed image subjected to the
temporal process of its degradation over
time. The result is a recursive
conversation between painting and
machine analog and digital where
glitches become the indirect appearance
of underlying protocols seams and noises
that surface only through resistance to
a system designed to eliminate them.
Brett Amy's work operates very
differently, but also stages a
confrontation with computational code.
His paintings and installations are
informed by what he calls the
zeroglyphic language, a system of
writing that he's been developing for
years, which at first appears abstract
and gestural, but in fact unfolds
according to a set of combinatory and
procedural rules that can be employed
for generative purposes. It's a language
that blurs the line between script and
code, visual surface and algorithmic
substrate, and indeed between symbolic
and subseymbolic processing. Trained on
daily scrapings of the internet,
including some of its darker corners,
zeroglyphic mediates contemporary events
into visual form, guiding production by
delimiting a set of elements to choose
from for screen printing and painting.
In the case of this work, archived
drift, the elements are drawn from
screens left over from previous works.
In this sense, Brett's practice
resonates with ours with mine and
Karin's. Both works, sorry, both works
explore how physical and digital
processes intersect in iteratively
reworking prior production and how codes
hide within surfaces that appear at
first glance to be purely painterly or
manual.
Turning from individual works, the
installation space itself brings
architectural and sociopolitical codes
into play. At the center of the gallery
space is a low doorway just over five
feet tall and thus hardly up to code. It
forced many visitors to duck, retraining
posture and impeding movement. After
spending time in the gallery and hitting
my head a couple of times, I found I
found myself ducking under every doorway
I encountered, even outside the show. My
body had been retrained. This isological
practice in action. The space literally
rewrote my habitual movements. And it
reminds us that architectural codes are
never neutral. They build normative
bodies into the environment, calibrating
access and exclusion through dimensions
that seem natural but are always coded.
The White Room installation itself,
along with a number of black boxes
throughout the exhibition, foreground
the intersection of computational,
material, and socopolitical codes. Black
boxes signal both the opacity of
computation and the secrecy of
geopolitical interrogation sites. The
uncomfortable white room which gathers
works by Kristen Wong, DJ Meisner,
William Trembley, Carlo Nasiss, and Jay
Mackery, alternately evokes clinical
sterility, a dirty garage or basement
setting, state surveillance, and online
conspiracy.
Vid visitors were drawn into bodily
negotiations with these spaces, ducking,
bending, peering, retracing steps, and
negotiating thresholds. The installation
staged a kind of side channel attack on
the conditions of visibility and
invisibility,
implicating bodies in the politics of
what can what can appear and what must
remain hidden.
Taken together, these works function as
laboratories.
They don't simply represent codes but
enact them producing detours,
retrainings and reorientations.
By traversing them, we catch a glimpse
of how computational, material, and
sociopolitical codes intersect on and
through the body and how art might
intervene in, disrupt or countercapture
these processes.
So what does all this mean in relation
to corporeal practice and perfection?
Perfection is a fantasy of seamlessness
and eliminating detours, but corporeal
practice is about inhabiting them.
Hotological space as Sartra described it
is constituted precisely by obstacles,
seams and pathways by the indirect roots
that shape how we inhabit the world. The
world is not just an empty container of
objects. It's a lived horizon structured
by affordances and resistances, detours
and reroutings.
This matters when we turn to the
contemporary language of existential
risk, which to my mind is in
insufficiently existentialist.
In popular discourse around artificial
intelligence, existential risk is
usually cast in planetary terms. AI as a
super intelligence that might wipe us
out, trigger nuclear war, or render
Earth uninhabitable.
But this objectified conception of the
world, the world as planet or
resourcebased misses what's truly at
stake. What's threatened is not only the
continuity of bi biological life, but
the worldhood of the world, the embodied
existential horizon of possible
experience.
Unlike many technologies, AI is not
encountered as an object, an inert thing
in the world. It's a pervasive system
that operates directly on the structures
of ecstatic existence by uh bypassing
symbols and working subsey symbolically
on our perceptual and affective
orientations.
It doesn't just mediate what we think
but modulates how we are attuned to the
world in the first place reconfiguring
the pathways and affordances that make
up hological space. To say that we are
hazarding the world is to recognize both
danger and possibility. Hazard points to
risk but also to the gamble of
orientation, the wager of inhabiting.
Computational infrastructures intervene
directly in ourological field,
shortcircuiting affordances and
rerouting the conditions of orientation.
They can close down pathways, narrowing
horizons, but they can also open open
unexpected ones as in the glitches and
detours staged in the exhibition. If
existential risk discourse tends to
abstract the human out of the picture,
an existentialist and embodied
perspective brings us back to the fact
that worldhood is always a bodily wager.
To hazard the world is to risk
reorientation, to feel our way through
glitches and detours that both imperil
and reconfigure our capacity to inhabit.
So let me circle back to the max might
suggest pushing the body to extremes
pursu pursuing the lure of a posthuman
perfectability.
But I want to propose a different
reading. To go to the max is to go to
the limits of embodiment in a different
sense. not to exceed but to feel out the
shifting conditions of the human itself.
The thresholds where bodies encounter
codes, where awe flips imperceptibly
into cringe, where unanticipated detours
reconfigure our movements, where
glitches open new horizons. In other
words, to go to the max is not to exceed
the body, but to inhabit its
vulnerability, its imperfection, its
openness to being rewritten.
That I think is where corporeal practice
lives today. In the recursive loops
between computation and embodiment,
between glitch and code, between the
black box and the hological path that
hazards the world. Thank you.